So our next speaker will be Rodrigo Silva Ferreira.
Rodrigo is a QA engineer at Quoset,
where he contributes to the quality and usability
of open-source tools that empower data scientists
in R and Python.
He focuses on both manual and automated testing strategies
to ensure reliability, performance,
and an excellent user experience.
All right, and without further ado,
the floor is yours, Rodrigo.
Yep, and, Rodrigo.
So, let's get started.
Hi, everyone, and good afternoon.
Today I'll be presenting about
The Notebook or Not to Notebook,
Multilingual Workflows for Data Analysis.
for Explorer for Data Analysis.
It's my first time in Canada, by the way,
and I'm really enjoying the experience so far.
So, I'm just gonna...
So, thank you everyone from the organization,
all the sponsors for organizing this amazing event.
And without further ado,
I'll start by introducing myself a little bit.
So, I'm originally from Brazil,
from a city called Salvador.
That's a picture of my city.
I'm based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
and I work as a geoengineer at Posit.
And my background is in chemistry,
but the past few years I've been getting more
into statistics, data,
especially in the context of data analysis
for issues of societal importance.
That's what I'm really interested in
because I believe that data and statistics
can be really helpful in helping understand
and improving the world.
And that's my personal blog,
in case anyone is interested.
And yeah, so,
what I'm really,
when I'm talking about something that I'm new to,
I really like to stand on the shoulders of the ground.
That's what people refer to that in academia.
And I see a lot of this conference as a conversation
between different talks that happened
in different locations,
and then after the conference,
they all become available on YouTube.
And that's what I really find exciting,
to watch them later,
and to see how they are interconnected,
and how the speakers have established
that those conferences are meeting for dialogue,
and for debates, and for conversations.
And so with that in mind,
one of my favorite keynote talks
that I attended recently was at Pi Data Boston,
which was given by one of my colleagues, actually,
Isabel Zimmerman,
and she talked about the importance of tools,
why we should care about tools,
about using them, and about using them.
And that talk really struck with me,
because that made me even more interested
in the tools that we use for data science,
but more in general,
the tools that we use every day, for example.
So some of the questions I had,
after Isabel's keynote,
were more general in terms of human history,
like what was the first tool that was ever made?
Who created it?
Where, when, and how?
And I think thinking about those questions
can really guide us,
as we think about tools that we use for programming,
for data analysis, and so on.
So that's why I find it very interesting
to think beyond just the technical aspects of what we do,
but to also think in terms of
the importance of these things for us as humans.
So trying to look for an answer for these questions,
I found out that the first tool ever made
were stones, essentially,
and the first stones that were found
were 3.4 million years ago,
which, it was very shocking to me,
because us, modern humans,
has only been around for 300,000 years.
So it's been, essentially, a very, very long time ago.
And what I found very interesting about this
is that shows that us, as humans,
we are always trying to create,
and innovate, and use tools across time.
And, but what do these ancient stones
have to do with multilingual notebooks?
Why am I bringing it up?
So the reason I'm bringing it up is because, again,
to reflect how these tools inform what we do,
and how we use them to achieve certain goals.
So I really encourage everyone to check the talk
by PyData Boston, that's available on YouTube.
And without further ado,
let's talk about the basic anatomy of a Jupyter Notebook,
which is one of the tools that we will be exploring today.
So this is from a talk on the history of Jupyter Notebooks,
that was presented.
How many of you here are familiar with Jupyter Notebooks?
Yeah, everyone.
Cool.
So everyone knows how it looks like.
And what I find very interesting about Jupyter Notebooks,
is the development of more and more extensions around it,
that are contributed by the community.
So everyone knows how to prep the docs
for the different extensions, and so on.
And these extensions allow for users
to extend the capabilities of Jupyter Notebooks.
One extension that I find really exciting, for example,
is to translate between different languages,
human languages, that's what I'm referring to here.
That allows it to translate the Markdown cells,
what you have written on a notebook,
into different languages.
So in terms of the current state
of the Jupyter extension ecosystem,
one website that I found out recently,
is the Jupyter Extension Marketplace.
And that website allows us to explore
different types of extensions that are available,
as well as extending some telemetry data
about each of the extensions.
So we can see how many downloads have been made
in the past month, in the past year,
for each of the extensions,
which extensions are the most popular, and so on.
So I find that that website
is not maintained by Project Jupyter,
it's an unofficial website,
but I find that really informative
when I'm looking for extensions
that fit into a particular purpose, and so on.
So there are some examples of extensions
for different purposes.
One of them is they're really like your API widgets,
which enable widget interactivity in a notebook, and so on.
So in the context of this talk,
in which we're talking about multilingual workflows,
some extensions can be really helpful
when you want to run different languages within a notebook.
And those are under that category
of runtime and kernel extensions.
And the reason I really like them
is because they can enable multilingual execution,
so you can have R execution within a notebook,
Python, SQL, and so on.
And when I was at PyDatabase,
I did a live stream with Ian DeBrieve,
who works for Matlab,
and he was essentially showing how he can run
a Matlab engine within a Jupyter notebook.
And that's one example of how multilingual kernel extensions
can be helpful for data analysis.
And by the way, those circles that I put out of the way
are for a playlist with all the videos
that I mentioned throughout the talk.
So in case you're interested of checking different talks
from other conference later
that are related to what I'm talking about,
that can be really helpful.
So a lot of what I'm exploring here
as the basis for this talk
in terms of the history of Jupyter notebooks
came from this previous talk at EuroPython,
which I found very interesting
because it gives a very solid overview
of the history of Jupyter notebooks.
And what I found very exciting about them
is that it has had a lot of progress
in the past 25 years, I would say,
with IPython being created in 2001,
and then IPython notebook first being released 2011.
And then the project Jupyter
being spun off from IPython in 2014.
And then there was the first JupyterCon
almost 10 years ago, like nine years ago.
And then the stable release of JupyterLab.
And by 2018, there were 2.7 million notebooks on GitHub.
And a few years ago, about five years ago,
Nature named Jupyter as one of the 10 projects
that confirmed science,
and it reached almost 10 million notebooks on GitHub.
So this very exciting history
in the rise of Jupyter notebooks
is not without controversies, though,
because some people really like notebooks
and some people really dislike notebooks.
So I don't know if you're familiar
with these two talks that were given before.
The first one is I Don't Like Notebooks,
which was given at JupyterCon.
And the second one is a PyData talk
that was given at one of those PyData conferences
called The First Notebook War.
And then there were these very interesting blog posts
that came up as well,
someone talked about contextualizing
that first notebook war,
and someone else responding to the I Don't Like Notebooks
talk, talking about how they like notebooks.
So there's a lot of controversy around notebooks.
And the reason why I love notebooks
beyond or despite of the technical aspects
is because, first, the idea of memory
and reproducibility in data science,
as notebooks can remember the computation state,
and you can pick up where you left
and continue your reproducible workflow.
Second, the idea of collaboration and community.
Third, narratives and incremental thinking,
how you can develop your analysis step by step,
making it easy to share with people
through codes, visualizations,
and explanations along the way.
Fourth, the bridge between computational and storytelling,
because you can tell your story with the data
in a way that can be engaging to your audience.
And besides all these reasons
that go beyond the technical aspects,
as I was reflecting about PyCon US last year,
I think there is one more reason that cannot be ignored,
which is just the act of playing
in the playful nature of exploratory data analogies.
And the reason why I say that I was reflecting about this
based on PyCon US last year,
because there was this very cool keynote talk
from Lynn Root,
in which she talks about the importance
of just playing in general.
So in this, like nowadays we have this pressure
to always be doing things for a particular purpose,
and because of work, or demands, or different goals,
I think it's really important as well
to think about the idea of data exploration
just out of curiosity,
and out of the desire to better understand the world.
So that's what I find really exciting
about exploratory data analysis
with notebooks in particular.
So yeah, so besides being playful,
I've come to realize that data scientists are multilingual.
Here's some data from the Kaggle survey from 2022,
which shows that Python, SQL, and R
are the third most used languages among data scientists.
And then there's your full data from 2018 to 2022.
2022 was the last year that they conducted that survey.
And here we can see that there has been a rise in usage
among data scientists of Python,
and SQL is increasing, and R, although it's decreasing,
it seems to be stable.
Like there's a very strong community
that remains using R,
especially for statistical analysis purposes and so on.
So as I see those different trends in Python,
SQL, and R adoption,
they really make me wonder
about what they mean for notebooks.
For me, it means that this data science
is increasingly polyglot.
It means that notebooks and IDEs should be true,
as real-world projects in their communities
often use multiple languages.
So you can have a data scientist who prefers to use SQL
because they are more into data engineering,
or a statistician who prefers to use R and so on,
as each of those languages are often used
for different purposes.
So it's the same idea of tools
and how people choose to use the tools that they need
and they prefer in order to see a particular need
and purpose.
So, in terms of multilingual notebook workflows,
I want to show an example of how to integrate
multiple languages within a notebook.
So a classic example would be using SQL
to extract data from a database,
Python to obtain and to affirm data,
and R with a stronger focus on statistics.
And there are two approaches
of tackling such workflows.
One of them is using notebooks.
As you know, there is also Quarto,
which I just used before,
which has a similar idea, but different concept,
in which you can essentially put some code
within your Markdown document
and you can execute them as you render the document.
So there's also one way of approaching it.
So that's a report that I put some,
it's almost like a boilerplate code
that I wanted to show with you here
with the notebook.
Let me run.
So let me see if I can change.
So that's a live demo then.
So let me see if I can change the...
I'm about to change to the different.
It did seem easier, yeah.
So let's see if it can work.
Okay, so if you want to just open the report
and run the notebook,
so it can just hit run all
because everything is made in a way that it should work.
Again, one of the big challenges behind notebooks
is being able to share a notebook with someone
and that other person be able to run it without problems.
So yeah, that's definitely something to consider.
But the idea behind that works well
of that notebook is that it shows how you can run
SQL, R and Python within the same notebook
using like Python and R2Pi extensions and so on
in order to perform your analysis.
So it's just one example.
And I think the dependency and the installations
that are done in the beginning can be really helpful
in case you have data science projects in the future
that you want to implement different languages
in the same workflow.
So that's what I encourage everyone to check it out.
And the Quarter document, it follows a different idea
in which at the moment that you render the document,
it can execute all the chunks of Python
and R code that you have, so yeah.
In terms of challenges of those multilingual workflows
for notebooks, I think it's worth mentioning
that when you add those polyglot capabilities,
there are certain complexities that emerge.
One of them is that debugging across different languages
can become very challenging
because you can be the new Python, R, SQL,
Julia and so on.
Managing dependencies can also have additional challenges
because you have multiple languages,
multiple dependencies and so on.
And often you are also running,
let's say Python, if you want to run Python in R,
for example, it might be using reticulate
or the other way around with the R2Pi extension and so on.
So those dependencies can also be challenging.
Third, we can have some performance overhead
as a result of that language creation.
And then we have the challenge of the team knowledge,
knowledge requirement can increase
because suddenly the person who's in Python
needs to know some R, SQL and so on.
And lastly, it can become harder to refactor the code
and to maintain as we'll have multiple languages being used.
And to solve some of these challenges,
what has been personally using
is exploring different notebook editors
and ideas that can make that type of workflow easier.
And I wanted to show here some examples.
And I think everyone should try different tools.
I really encourage that
because certain tools can be better for certain audiences.
Some people have personal preference
towards certain IDEs or certain notebook editors and so on.
So a few examples of notebook editors
that are becoming more popular besides JupyterLab
are DeepNode, GoCollab and Marimo.
All of them have their advantages and disadvantages.
So that's why I encourage everyone to try different things.
In terms of IDE, everyone knows like VF Code,
there is also PyCharm and there is Positron,
which is the IDE that I've been building
for the past year at work.
So just to chat a little bit more about Positron,
like there is integration for Jupyter Notebook
with Positron.
So I think it provides a backers included experience
in which people can just download Positron,
which by the way is free, it's open source.
And you can just do your notebook exploration within the IDE.
And that exploration is integrated with like Data Explorer,
which is a tool that's available within the IDE,
as well as a native variables thing.
And second, in terms of like AI integration,
there's definitely integration of like Positron systems,
which enables for AI to make changes to your notebook
and the way, I don't know if you can see this.
Yeah.
So essentially you can have central prompts
or you can have a custom prompt as well.
And as you put your things, it can make edits.
O motivo pelo qual eu trago estes exemplos é um exemplo de um tool que pode ser útil, mas, de novo, eu acho que a ideia de usar diferentes tools e procurar-os pode ser muito ajudosa em geral, e eu gosto de pensar novamente sobre o
que é a filosofia da implementação destas ferramentas.
E uma das melhores implementações que eu vi
foi na verdade com o Jupiter.ai,
em que há esta apresentação no Jupiter.com
mostrando como agentes da A.I. dentro do Jupiter.lab
podem colaborar com os outros.
Então eu achei isso muito legal,
então eu encorajo a todos a conferir esta palestra
do último ano do Jupiter.com.
E por último, se você ainda não está satisfeito
com o estado atual das notebooks,
especialmente para as ferramentas de ciência de dados multilinguais,
eu também estou.
Então, ou você pode conferir Positron e CIFS
que são suas necessidades,
ou você também pode se conectar comigo.
E por último, eu realmente penso na ideia
de ações abertas e da ciência de dados
serem úteis para um mundo melhor.
Então é por isso que eu estou trabalhando nesses projetos
e espero que vocês tenham gostado da aula,
do meu palestrar.